Lots of words, especially in English, end up getting tokenized into a single token, often with a
space in front of it.
And that makes doing research fairly straightforward, because one activations vector often corresponds
to one English word, but lots of other words are made up of multiple tokens.
So let's say you have a target word that you want to look at the activations for.
But that target word has 2 or 3 tokens, maybe even more tokens.
So what do you do?
Answering that question is the goal of this video.
I will tell you what is the best thing to do and explain why.
And then in the next video, you will use this knowledge to analyze category specific responses in MLP
projections.
So here you see three words that are multi Token words.
So let's look at toothpaste.
The word toothpaste comprises two tokens, one for space tooth and one for no space.
And then paste and time machine, I suppose, is technically two words.
So therefore we have one token for each word.
But there are plenty of situations where time machine is treated as if it were one word, so you wouldn't
want to use the word time without machine, and you wouldn't want to analyze the embeddings vectors
for machine unless they were preceded by the token for time.
So even though this might technically be two separate words for the purpose of analysis, we might often
want to treat this as if it were one word.
And here we have a hyphenated word which is represented by three tokens.
So which of these tokens would you focus on if you wanted to do some analyses?
Perhaps you just look at the first token, or maybe the last token in this little mini sequence.
Or maybe you take all of them and you average the embeddings, vectors and the activations and whatever
else you're looking at.
You would average them all together for all of the tokens.
If you would like to take a moment to think about this issue.
Feel free to pause the video and give it some thought.
So it turns out that the best approach is just to analyze the final token in the target word or phrase.
And the reason for this is that when the model sees the token for the word tooth, it does not yet know
what token comes next.
It knows all the tokens that came before, and all of that contextual information gets loaded onto the
embeddings vector for tooth.
But there's no guarantee that the next token will be paste.
Okay.
Now when the model actually sees the token for paste, especially with the preceding without the preceding
space, and the previous token is for tooth.
Then the vector, the embeddings vector for paste will be modulated such that or according to the information
from the preceding token, which is truth, and then the model will know that this is toothpaste, which
is different from any other kind of paste.
And toothpaste is also a very different word, with different meanings and implications compared to
just tooth on its own.
Another way to phrase this is that tooth doesn't know anything about paste, but paste knows a lot about
tooth.
So therefore the idea is that analyzing the token paste actually means also analyzing information about
toothpaste.
Anyway, so that's the idea.
So conceptually that makes sense.
In practice the coding can get a little bit tricky.
So therefore I have a little Python demo to show you, which will also provide code for the code challenge
in the next video.
So before switching to code, let me first give you an overview of what you will see in the code demo.
I will start by exploring some multi-token words with a reminder about the importance of preceding spaces
and the impact that has on tokenization.
That is pretty striking in this toothpaste example, where getting rid of the space in front of toothpaste
gives a very different tokenization, at least for tooth.
Next, I will create a few sentences that contain each of these target words.
And this is partly just to have a little bit of context for the model to have before the target word,
and also as a reminder about the issue of preceding spaces when you want to generate algorithmic text
data.
Okay, now, the way that I've constructed these sentences, I know for a fact that the target words
and the target token sequences are always at the very end, but lots of other cases, including the
code challenge in the next video, you don't necessarily know where exactly so which index in the sequence
a target word appears.
So therefore I will show you some code that might seem a little bit overkill for this demo, but you'll
see that it will be necessary for the next video.
Okay, so here we have a for loop over the sentences.
That's these sentences here.
And then I loop over all of the target words here I'm calculating how many tokens are in this particular
target word.
And then here in this third for loop I'm looping over all of the tokens in this sentence.
So this sequence in the batch and testing whether this token and the preceding several tokens match
the target token.
If it does, then we can save this index for later analyses.
Okay, then I'm going to push all the tokens through the model.
These sentences have different numbers of tokens.
So to input them as a batch we also need to pad the sequences, which means we also need to input not
only the tokens themselves but also the attention mask.
And that's why I have this double asterisk over here to unpack this dictionary of inputs here.
Okay.
And then you can see the size of the hidden states over here.
There are six sentences, 14 tokens including padding and of course 768 embeddings dimensions.
This is with GPT two small.
And finally, I'll do some very simple analyses to look at how the token embeddings change from one
layer to the next.
The way I did this analysis is that for each layer starting from hidden state layer one, I take the
embeddings vector for the final token in the target word, subtract it from the exact same token but
from the previous layer, and then take the norm of that difference vector.
Now later on in the course, I will provide a geometric interpretation of this analysis.
I will refer to it as the length of the path that the token embeddings vector is taking as it traverses
through the model.
But that's for later.
For now, you can just interpret this as a measure of how much the token vector changes from one layer
to the next.
Okay, so I repeat this for the last token in the target word.
The second to last token in the target word, and also for the last two tokens within each layer.
Now, we don't really need to worry about interpreting this stuff here.
I just want to give you a bit of exposure to using these tokens to extract activation patterns from
the model.
Anyway, now let's switch to code and have a look.
We only need a few libraries for this video.
Here I'm importing the GPT two tokenizer and GPT two small.
Okay, here is the example that I showed in the slides.
So I have toothpaste with a space.
Toothpaste without a space.
Same for Time Machine.
And I also have with a hyphen in here for just various spellings.
And then here I am creating some very interesting sentences, including that target word.
Now one of the things I wanted to remind you of here.
Let me print this out here, is that if you are creating text data for running experiments in a language
model, you need to be mindful of whether your target words that you are listing already include spaces
before them or not, so this is sort of awkward.
Most written text does not have a double space before words, and something like this could actually
confuse the model a little bit and have a negative impact on your analyses, so you just need to keep
that in mind.
Uh, you know, it would be a little bit more appropriate to do something like this, although then
of course that's fine when you specify the target words with a preceding space, but not when you don't.
So yeah, just something to be mindful of in the future.
Okay.
Let's see.
So here is this ridiculous piece of code where I am identifying the location of the target, uh, in
each of these sentences here.
So I loop over sentences, loop over, uh, all the different targets that we are looking for, get
the length of the targets.
And that is because each target can have a different number of tokens.
And then yeah, here I'm looping over all of the tokens in the sequence.
Here I say torch dot equal.
And I'm looking for the token sequence for this sentence for the current token.
And then going back target length.
So however long the target is in terms of the number of tokens.
And then does that match the actual target token sequence.
So if those do not match then nothing happens.
We go on to the next token in the sequence, and if these do match, then this means that we are looking
at the end of a target word.
With however many targets, tokens are in the target word like 2 or 3.
Okay.
And then I just say that this sentence has a target word at this index here.
And the reason for the minus one is just because of Python indexing starting from zero, whereas this
loop I start from the target length.
Okay, so we can run that.
And here we see sentence zero.
So the first sentence has the first target at index 12.
So we have six sentences here.
So zero through five.
But we're missing a couple of targets.
So some targets are just not identified here.
In particular targets one and two and four.
And those all correspond to the targets that I specified without the preceding space.
Very good.
So now we know where the targets appear.
The final token for each target word in the sentence.
And yeah then I can do a forward pass.
Here we get the hidden states as well.
And now here I'm going to loop over all of the sentences and now all of the layers and grab the activations
just for the final token of the target word in each sentence.
And I'm doing this twice for the final token, and for the last or the second to last token in the sentence.
Okay, so that runs super fast.
So we have 13 layers, six sentences, 768 embeddings dimensions and two tokens, the final token of
the target word and the second to last in the target word.
Yeah.
And then here I don't really want to get into this too much.
This is just a quick demo of using these activations for doing some simple analyses and some simple
visualizations.
In the next video in the code challenge, you're going to follow a kind of similar procedure, although
it's going to be more complicated than what I've shown here, but you're going to be doing more interesting
analyses that what I have done here.
So here basically, I'm looping over all of the hidden states layers from index one.
Remember that index one actually corresponds to the first transformer block, because zero is the embeddings
the initial embeddings layer.
I know I've repeated that like a million times, but I will probably say it again.
So here I'm getting the difference in the embeddings vector for this layer compared to the previous
layer, and then calculating the norm of that difference vector and then plotting that.
So essentially this is just measuring how much the embeddings vector changes from one transformer block
to the next.
And all of those changes of course, are attributable to the adjustments that are calculated and added
on to the residual stream by the attention and by the MLP sub blocks within each transformer block.
So that's it for this video.
As I mentioned in the beginning of this video, you'll get to use some of the code here in the code
challenge in the next video.